FEMALE VOICE: In the
mid 80s fewer than 3%
of all people in
most of our countries
were using cell
phones, but you fast
forward to today when
almost 100% of people
using cell phones--
MALE VOICE: By the time
they're 19 or 20 years old,
they will have used
the phone for 10 years
and we have no idea what
type of risk that's carrying.
We've immersed
ourselves in an ocean
of electromagnetic radiation.
It's all around us now,
invisible, we can't see it,
but we know it's there.
Every time you lift
up your mobile phone
you know it's there.
It's very, very hard to
turn the clock back, if not
impossible to turn
the clock back,
but we need to be aware
of those health effects
so that we have the choice
of taking precaution
against the exposures.
At present, the World
Health Organization
statements regarding
this are that it is real.
We were not the only cancer
cluster around a phone mast.
There are many cancer
clusters around phone masts.
Most of the cancers which will
arrive haven't arrived yet.
How could we have possibly
thought putting microwaves
to our brain was safe?
We just don't fully understand
yet what we're doing.
We have an announcement
finally on whether cell
phones cause cancer.
NARRATOR: An
unknown scientist is
about to make a discovery that
should have changed everything.
His name was Winifred
Otto Schumann.
On the day in question, he
was teaching his students
about the physics
of electricity,
how a sphere within a sphere
can create electrical tension
and subsequently a frequency.
Schumann's class had struggled
to understand the subject.
So to make it easier the
professor instructed them
to imagine the Earth as one
sphere and the ionosphere
as another.
He then asked them to
calculate the tension
that would exist in between.
Having no idea himself, Schumann
also began to calculate.
Eventually, he arrived at
a frequency, a frequency
of approximately 10 Hertz.
As incredible as it
seemed to Schumann,
our planet had a pulse,
a measurable frequency
that surrounded life on Earth.
Although the professor
was proud of his find,
he didn't see it is a hugely
significant one especially
as it was only published
in a small science journal
confined to the back
pages under the heading
of "Schumann-Resonanz."
It would take several years
and an incredible twist of fate
before the professor will begin
to realize the true importance
of Schumann resonance.
That twist of fate
that began 30 years
earlier with another
German scientist
by the name of Hans Berger.
Using an EEG machine
he had built himself,
Berger made the
first ever recording
of electrical frequency
transmitted by the human brain.
It was initially suggested the
wave be named after the man who
discovered it, but
Berger being a modest man
elected for an alphabetical name
and called it the alpha wave.
Shortly after Professor
Schumann's discovery,
one of Hans Berger's
colleagues, a man
named Dr. Ankermueller
happened to stumble
upon a bedraggled copy of a
small, scientific journal,
the exact same small,
scientific journal
that Professor Schumann's
discovery had been published
in several years before.
He read the piece several times
shaking his head in disbelief.
He realized instantly
the magnitude
of what was in front of him.
The frequency of the alpha
waves recorded by Hans Berger
were almost identical
to Schumann resonance,
the frequency of the Earth.
Dr. Ankermueller immediately
contacted Schumann to convince
him to investigate further.
Schumann agreed and worked
alongside one of his students
to refine his discovery.
They studied in
detail how tension
is discharged by lightning in
the Earth ionosphere cavity.
Eventually, they came up
with an exact frequency.
The pulse of the Earth,
Schumann resonance,
was exactly 7.83 Hertz.
The discovery was remarkable.
Schumann resonance wasn't just
similar to the alpha waves
of the human brain,
it was identical.
The brain's frequency which
controlled our creativity,
our performance, our stress,
anxiety, and our immune system
had somehow tuned into the
frequency of the planet.
The pulse of the Earth had
become the pulse of life
itself.
The frequency of a wave
is measured in Hertz.
This refers to the
number of oscillations
the wave makes each second.
Frequencies range
from a billionth
the size of an atom to the
length of the universe itself.
In theory, frequencies
are infinite,
so ultimately endless.
If this was a coincidence, it
was nature's most spectacular.
So what did all this mean?
It wasn't long before
somebody tried to find out.
His name was Rutger Wever,
an acclaimed scientist
from the Max Planck Institute.
In the early 1960s,
the professor
constructed an underground
bunker in order
to examine the circadian
rhythms of man.
The circadian rhythm
is the day-night cycle
that is engraved into all life.
Over a 30 year
period, the professor
conducted experiments in which
student volunteers would spend
several weeks at a time
living in the bunker
completely shielded from
the natural resonances
of the Earth.
In his results, Wever noted
some astonishing findings.
He discovered that when Schumann
resonance was filtered out
of the bunker, the
student's physical
and mental health would suffer.
He took students down there.
He didn't trust to do it
with ill or old people.
He took young students down
there because Wever knew
that there would be an effect.
So obviously underground you
don't have Schumann resonance,
you only have the
transverse magnetic fields
from in the earth.
So by putting them
underground, they started
feeling sick, having headaches.
Their circadian rhythm
was completely upset.
The interesting thing was when
he just introduced the 7.8
Hertz frequency with the
magnetic pulse generator,
that immediately stopped.
NARRATOR: Weaver would
secretly introduce
the 7.83 frequency to the bunker
by a man-made transmitter.
Each time he did so,
he noted the ill effect
suffered by the volunteers
either disappeared
or decreased.
Their stress, headaches,
and emotional distress
was reduced and
their sense of well
being was restored all
by the introduction
of Schumann resonance.
Wever's research had revealed
an incredible connection
between human health and
the natural frequency
of the planet.
And in 2011,
groundbreaking research
suggested something
even more impressive,
that Schumann resonance could
be connected to the beginnings
of life itself.
The breakthrough came at
the hands of Luc Montagnier,
the Nobel Prize-winning
scientist who
first discovered the HIV virus.
The professor was conducting
water memory experiments
examining how water could retain
a memory of substances that had
previously been dissolved in it
when he stumbled upon something
that would challenge the
very principles of science,
all life comes from life.
This is a fundamental
principle of science and one
which has never been
violated in any experiment.
Life can only exist where
life has existed before
and the mechanism
for this has always
been understood to be a material
one, such as egg and sperm
or spore and cell division.
But Luc Montagnier's
experiments have offered
a very different hypothesis.
The professor showed that DNA
sequences, the very building
blocks of life, communicate
with each other in water
by emitting low frequency
electromagnetic waves.
Even when the DNA was kept
in separate test tubes,
the professor still recorded
electromagnetic communication
between them.
How sophisticated could
this communication be?
Well, Luc Montagnier
showed they are
able to organize nucleotides,
the ingredients which actually
make up DNA into brand new DNA.
Scientists combined these
ingredients countless times
before but in no experiment have
they have been able to recreate
the spark of life and transform
nucleotides into actual DNA,
not without DNA
already being present.
Life, after all, can only exist
where life has existed before.
But in Luc Montagnier's
experiments,
the DNA had been completely
filtered from the water
yet new DNA was still found.
Just how was this possible?
How had Luc Montagnier
managed to achieve what
no other scientist
could and create
life where no life was present?
What was so different about
Luc Montagnier's experiments?
There was the presence of a
frequency, a frequency which
when removed would cause
the experiments to fail,
but when present would ensure
that they would succeed.
That frequency was 7.83
Hertz, Schumann resonance.
A delicate relationship
had been struck
between life and the
frequency of the planet,
an interaction of
living organisms
and electromagnetic
frequencies, a reliance, a bond.
Evidence of this can be found
by reading the science papers,
but more obvious
proof can be found
by simply walking outside.
How did all this happen?
Well, when you look at
the history of the Earth
it seems pretty obvious.
Schumann waves have
been part of this planet
since the very beginning.
Life evolves surrounded by
them and inevitably tuned in.
In fact, our
sensitivity to frequency
became deeply connected to
our ability to sense another
of the planet's phenomena.
Two billion years ago
magnetotatic bacteria
formed a simple but intriguing
relationship with the Earth's
magnetic fields.
The single-celled
organism contained
particles of magnetic material.
This enabled it to act like
the needle of a compass
and orient along the
magnetic lines of the Earth.
As organisms became
more complex,
so did their reliance on
the Earth's magnetic fields.
We do know that bees are
sensitive to magnetic fields.
We know that within
their bodies they
contain particles of Earth
magnetite and laboratory
studies have shown
that they are indeed
sensitive to magnetic fields.
And you can demonstrate
in laboratory
that if you artificially
create a magnetic field,
you can control the way
that they build their cone
and it seems logical
that bees are using
magnetic fields in navigation.
NARRATOR: - The delicate
balance of life on Earth
is perfectly illustrated
by reliance on bees
and their pollination of plants.
It's hypothesized that
without bees life wouldn't
stand much of a chance.
Insect pollination is needed
for really all the things
that make eating interesting,
so all the fruits, the nuts,
and things like that all
require insect pollination
and bees are the most
important group of pollinators.
If the bees weren't here,
we'd have a very boring planet.
Yes.
We would have a
very thin existence,
I think that's the point
without bees and of course,
as well as the food
that way need to eat,
they're pollinating
wild plants as well.
And in many cases, we don't
know details about pollination
of wild plants
but we can be sure
that without bees to pollinate
then many of our wild plants
will disappear.
RADIO HOST (ON RADIO): We
are with Marianne Frazier,
the senior extension associate
for beekeeping at Pennsylvania
State University.
What are the classic criteria
of colony collapse disorder
so that any beekeeper can go
out there and look at their bees
and say, this looks like a
pretty classic case of this?
MARYANN FRAZIER (ON
RADIO): The symptoms
are that the bees are
relatively healthy and strong
and in a very short
period of time,
the adult bee population
disappears from the colony.
It leaves the colony.
And what it leaves
behind is a lot of brood,
meaning the young
bees, honey and pollen.
RADIO HOST (ON RADIO):
On what continents
has this colony collapse
disorder been observed?
MARYANN FRAZIER (ON RADIO):
Well the decline of honeybees
has occurred actually worldwide.
We've seen many other countries
report declines in honeybees,
whether or not it's truly due
to this thing called colony
collapse disorder, which is a
pretty unique set of criteria
is another question.
And that's one of
the things we're
trying to understand by
trying to communicate
with other people in
other parts of the world.
This sort of current
concern particularly
dates from about
2006 and particularly
in the United States where a
lot of commercial bee keepers
suddenly found that their
bees had been healthy
at one point in the year
and then in late summer
just suffered these
spectacular losses.
And they appeared to be
different from anything
that had been seen before.
So people were just
going to their hives
and finding there
were no bees at all.
NARRATOR: Colony collapse
disorder has affected hives
all around the world
with some countries
reporting losses of up to 70%.
A variety of reasons have
been offered as to its cause,
but none of them have been
able to conclusively explain
why all of a sudden bees
don't return to the hives,
apart from one, a
sensational piece of research
by Joseph Kuhn and his team.
In an experiment, the doctor
worked with eight beehives
and placed a regular home deck
phone inside half of them.
The scientists then monitored
if the presence of a deck phone
would affect the way that
bees return to their hive.
The results were astonishing.
In the hives where no
deck phone was present,
the bees returned
at a normal rate,
but in the hives which
contained a deck phone,
the bees hardly returned at all.
In one hive containing
a deck phone,
not a single bee returned.
To fully understand
the relevance
of Dr. Kuhn's experiment,
we must first understand
how a deck phone works.
The reason you are able
to walk around your home
talking on your deck phone
is because the base station
of the direct phone sends
electromagnetic frequency
waves called microwaves
to the handset.
This is exactly the same
way that a mobile phone
mast communicates
with a mobile phone.
A deck phone is basically
a miniature version
of a mobile phone mast.
If a bee is affected by what
comes out of a deck phone,
it will most definitely
be affected by what comes
out of a mobile phone mast.
And with four billion mobile
phone users around the world,
all of a sudden there
are an awful lot
of mobile phone masts.
The bee's magnetic
sense allows it
to navigate using the magnetic
lines of the Earth, an ability
it has spent millions of years
you fine tuning and developing.
Does it stand to reason then
that such an acute sensitivity
will be affected by
even the slightest
change in the
electromagnetic environment?
So what about a gargantuan
change and one which
has happened almost overnight?
Are there other species
that have this sensitivity
to magnetic fields,
a sensitivity
which ultimately makes
them vulnerable to man-made
frequencies?
Unfortunately, the discovery
of a new protein cell
called a cryptochrome suggests
all life has a magnetic sense.
They were discovered
in the 1990s in plants
where their function is to
absorb blue light, which
is used to regulate growth.
They were since been found
in insects, animals, mammals,
including humans and in birds.
Cryptochromes are a biological
molecule called a protein.
It's generated by some of
your genes called cry genes
and the cryptochrome
molecule actually
controls your circadian
rhythms including
melatonin productions.
Some of the cryptochrome seem
to have a function of absorbing
the light as detectors
for the circadian clock,
so they are inputs for
the light-dark cycle
that many species seem to have,
plants as well as animals.
NARRATOR: But in the
year 2000, Thorsten Ritz
demonstrated an
even more amazing
role for the cryptochrome.
In a series of
experiments on Robbins,
he demonstrated that their
navigational sense was not only
a magnetic one, but
it came directly
from the cryptochrome
cells, which
are located behind the eye.
I think the Ritz
paper published in 2000
is one of those
milestones in science
because he proposed that this
cryptochrome molecule, which,
remember, is best known for its
effect in controlling circadian
rhythms, that that
molecule was actually
responsible for giving
the magnetic compass
information in birds.
The birds literally see
the Earth's magnetic field
perhaps as a bright or
dark spot superimposed
on their field of vision.
Then as they then move their
head or their body around,
the spot moves and so rather
like a heads-up display
for a fighter pilot.
They have this thing that
they see, goodness knows
what it would be,
which allows them
to orient while they're flying.
The way he tested that was to
expose birds to radio frequency
fields to see if it
actually disturbed
their magnetic compass and not
only did the radio frequency
field indeed disrupt the
migration of Robbins,
but it did so at very, very
low intensities of fields
and that's really important
and really interesting,
that very low level radio
frequency fields interfered
with the Robbin's compass.
NARRATOR: The experiments
by Ritz clearly demonstrated
that the cryptochrome
cell used in navigation
was seriously affected
by man-made frequencies
and man-made frequencies levels
well below those deemed safe
by the governing body ICNIRP.
All of the animal
navigation studies,
the cockroaches, the zebra
finches, the chickens,
the Robbins, they've all
had their magnetic compass
disturbed by radio
frequency fields
well below the ICNIRP
public exposure limit.
I work on birds, particularly
birds and insects.
I have shown that they
are sensitive to fields
way below the ICNIRP levels
that claim are safe for us.
If you look at where
the research shows
they are sensitive to, there's
good stuff in the literature
showing it's significantly lower
than what we are allowed to be
exposed to and
therefore what they're
exposed to in the environment.
There's certainly
solid scientific reason
for supposing that
magnetic fields,
artificial magnetic fields,
will disturb the habitat
of a number of species.
How much has our
environment changed
because of electromagnetic
fields because of--
Over the last 25 years, it's
a changed beyond recognition,
just beyond recognition.
It's millions and
millions of times in terms
of electromagnetic energy.
The former National
Radiological Protection Board,
in one of their documents,
said that they thought
that the radiation environment,
if you like to call it that,
had increased many millions of
times from what it was 50 years
ago, many millions of times.
It's an enormous change
in environment on Earth,
I mean, completely swamped
all these natural signals,
including the Schumann waves
that we have evolved with.
One of the reasons that
cryptochromes are particularly
interesting from the point of
view of human being detecting
magnetic fields is that there's
a recent study by Dr. Foley
and colleagues showing that
if you put human cryptochromes
into the fruit fly, then the
fruit fly is made particularly
sensitive because
of the presence
of these human cryptochromes.
So this is actually showing
that human cryptochromes
are magnetically sensitive.
In fact, they detect
magnetic fields.
NARRATOR: The discovery
of the cryptochrome cell
has sparked new interest in the
magnetic sense of man, a sense
that Robin Baker had
predicted some 40 years ago.
NARRATOR (ON TV):
This is not some kind
of scientific blind man's bluff.
It's an experiment to
find out whether children
have a sense of direction.
Blindfolded and ear
muffed, the subject
is turned around
in a special chair
until he can't remember
which direction he's facing.
The chair stops and the subject
guesses whether he's facing
east, west, north or south.
The guest is recorded
in a small computer.
If children have no
sense of direction,
their guesses would be random.
But they're not.
Children after the
age of about 10 or 11
make pretty good guesses.
It seems they have a
real sense of direction
and it seems to be
a magnetic sense.
When the scientist struck a
magnet to the subject's head,
it disrupts his sense
of direction severely.
And this is a huge
advance in understanding.
It begs all sorts of questions.
It begs questions of
whether human beings
can actually navigate in
the Earth's magnetic field.
Even though they don't
do it today, did they
do it thousands of years ago.
And of course, it begs the
question as to whether this was
a process by which magnetic
fields are actually detected
in the human body, which
leads to this disturbance
of circadian rhythms which would
explain all the diverse health
effects that we see so much else
in the epidemiological studies
of health in magnetic fields.
NARRATOR: If mankind
has the ability
to sense magnetic
fields, the same ability
as the bees, the birds,
and the butterflies,
does that also mean that we
are as vulnerable as they
are to man-made frequencies?
Will changes in our
environment affect us
as it's clearly affecting them?
INTERVIEWER: So how would
describe electrosensitivity?
Electrical sensitivity is
when people start reacting,
their body starts reacting
to electromagnetic fields.
Generally speaking, the
electromagnetic fields
that they'll be
reacting to is wireless.
So it will be wireless
communications.
It will be Wi-Fi.
It will be cordless phones, deck
phones, mobile phones, masts,
all of them emitting
signals that our body
has never experienced before.
And when people start to become
affected, the way I became
infected, the way that
it starts to affect you
is generally speaking
it's your head first
and it will start giving
you pains in your head.
I hate to use the word headache
because it's pains in your head
that is unlike
any other headache
you've ever had before.
Most people's complaints are
things like cardiac arrhythmia,
insomnia, headache, visual
disturbance, vertigo,
different kinds of
paresthesias or neurasthenias
where they are feeling unusual
sensations within their body.
But really it can also
affect endocrine function,
thyroid function, again,
the list is really endless.
In my particular case, and
this is not everybody's case,
if I then don't get
out of the environment,
I start getting quite
severe pains in my gut
and that will then
mean it's too late.
I will then start
bleeding internally.
I think that the
symptoms are so diverse
and the associations
that people make
are very difficult
to accept if you have
no knowledge of
this subject, which
most physicians do not have and
that's no fault of their own.
We're not trained to
recognize this condition.
It's very innovative and
our understanding of it
is entirely embryonic
at this stage.
We're at the very first
steps of unraveling and fully
understanding this condition.
NARRATOR: Brian,
like many sufferers
of electrosensitivity,
has been forced to make
radical changes to his home.
The area of these two
rooms have been completely
shielded in metal foil so
that this room and the bedroom
are a Faraday cage.
And if you actually check
the electromagnetic fields
or the microwave, and this
machine is simply converting
microwaves to no use, you
find that the mast that's was
about half a mile away
over there, which causes me
a problem, by shielding the room
and putting metalized glass,
means that I can eliminate most
of the electromagnetic fields.
The aspects of an organism that
allow it to detect and respond
to electromagnetic fields, you
could say this way it's going
to use a number of
different contacts
and if you bisect it and
break it down, electrically
sensitive, you could
say that really that's
a response to life
itself in that,
for example, if we are
looking at an organism
to determine the
presence of life,
we're really looking for
the presence of electricity.
So with the electrocardiogram,
for example, the ECG
and the electroencephalogram,
the EEG,
what we're looking at
there is the presence
of electricity from
those target organs,
the brain and the heart.
And when we see the
presence of that,
that's a sign that
there is life.
So in a way, given that
on a cellular level,
electromagnetic
fields, a part of life
itself, we could
say that all life is
electromagnetically sensitive.
NARRATOR: Desperate to convince
people that electrosensitivity
was genuine, Brian and a
number of other sufferers
signed up to a landmark
experiment at Essex University.
The experiment,
run by Elaine Fox,
would suddenly become the
definitive work on the subject.
You have to go
into a shielded room
and you go in there for a
relatively short period of time
and the mast is on for 10
minutes and off for 10 minutes
and on for 10 minutes and
to see whether you can
detect whether it's on or not.
And I went into the
room having told them
that I would not be able to
tell them whether the mast was
on or off or on.
INTERVIEWER: Why's that?
Because their understanding of
how you react to this is wrong.
This is not a case
with most people
where you turn the mast
on and oh, I'm affected.
They turn the mast
off, oh, I'm OK again.
It doesn't work like that.
I suffer with hay fever
and when I go into a field
where there is pollen,
it takes a while
before I'll be affected,
but it takes a long time
before I'm not affected.
I can be removed from the
hay field for 24 hours,
but I'll still be
feeling my hay fever
and electrical sensitivity
with most people
is a little bit like that.
NARRATOR: The way the team had
sets up the experiment meant
it would be almost
impossible for Brian
and the other volunteers to
prove they were being affected,
not that it would
matter as the team had
inexplicably decided to do
away with any form of vetting
procedure.
For one thing,
people appear to be
sensitive to different things.
I'm sensitive to
3G mobile phones.
GSM mobile phones.
For example, there are
differences in the way
the modulation works.
I have no idea whether they're
right in their sensitivities,
but if that is the case,
then it makes sense
that the people who you've
gotten into your study
claim to be sensitive
to exactly the signal
that you're going to
be exposing them to.
If you have someone that,
for example, is always
sensitive to Wi-Fi
but they're never
sensitive to mobile
phones, if they exist,
then you make sure that what
they're being exposed to
is Wi-Fi and not mobile
phones because you're actually
trying to prove whether
they're sensitive to what
they're saying there are.
None of that
differentiation was done.
It was really if you claim
to be sensitive to anything
at all that happened to be
electromagnetic, you were in.
Well, one of the reasons why I
thought it was quite important
was I help people who are
electrically sensitive
and a couple of months before
I'd actually been to a lady's
house who thought she was
electrically sensitive just
to try and help her
and to explain to her
what electrical
sensitivity was and what
might be causing her problem.
And to make a long story
short, it was obvious
that this particular
lady had a problem
but she was not
electrically sensitive.
She was definitely not
But in the going of
the conversation,
she'd signed up for
the Essex trials
to try and find out whether
she was electrically sensitive.
Well, my heart missed a beat.
Well, here's somebody that's
not electrically sensitive
and they've signed up to go to
Essex and Essex are telling me
they don't have a
vetting procedure.
What they actually
found-- and this
is based on the text
in the paper itself,
I'm not sort of paraphrasing--
is they needed, according
to them, with the level of
response they were expecting
to see from sensitive
people, they
would need about 132
people, participants
in their study to
show a statistically
significant effect.
That's how much population,
if you like, they would need.
That's how much data they would
need in their study findings
before they could say,
this group is clearly
more sensitive than that group.
What they got was 44.
So from the very
outset, they only
had a third of the data they
expected that they would
need to find anything anyway.
What they ended up finding
was a near statistically
significant risk in a way.
The people who claimed
to be sensitive
showed that they were
sensitive with a significance
of about 90%.
So the borderline at
which a scientific paper
says, yes, this is statistically
significant is 95%.
If you don't get that
level of certainty,
it's not a statistical
finding at all.
It could be random
chance and noise.
They got something which was
90% certainty of an increase
in risk and of course, it fails
the magic bar at which you can
call it a statistically
significant result
and it was written
off as a, this
demonstrates that people
aren't sensitive when
actually it did no such thing.
NARRATOR: The constant
exposure to the mast
took its toll on a number of the
volunteers, making some of them
so sick they were forced to
withdraw from the experiment.
For Brian, the effects
of the experiment
will be felt long
after he left Essex.
My first colonoscopy
was seven years ago.
My second one was
four years ago.
The third one was
about a year ago.
There is nothing
the matter with me.
There's nothing
Absolutely.
You're imagining it.
I've got colon cancer.
So from the first time that I
bled till the time of removing
the polyp was seven years.
When I asked the
doctor how long does
it take to cancer to
develop, seven years.
So you can virtually track
the time when I went to Essex
and there was one
occasion before where
I started bleeding.
With that bleeding has
caused me colon cancer.
NARRATOR: How could such
a botched experiment
be held up as such a
definitive piece of research?
Why would such an
experienced team
make such fundamental and
obvious errors in their work?
Could it be anything to do with
those who provided the funding?
The Essex experiment is one of
a number of experiments funded
by the MTHR, a company
set up and funded
by the mobile
industry themselves.
INTERVIEWER: Could you
explain what MTHR does
and how MTHR is funded?
-Yes.
The MTHR program is funded
jointly by the UK government
and the mobile
telecommunications industry
and it funds research into
possible adverse health
effects related to
mobile phone technology.
The whole issue of who
funds scientific research
is a thorny issue.
I know many
scientists like myself
who when they get a
new study to read,
the first thing they turn
to is the back of the page
where it says who funded it.
INTERVIEWER: Is
there, do you think,
maybe a conflict of
interest in the mobile phone
industry funding research
into the harm that it does?
Well, of course there is a
potential conflict of interest
and that's why a program
of funding like this
has to be carefully managed.
I've done a lot of work with
the telecommuters industry
because I organize a
communication workers
representation in here, and
so I've talked to these people
for a long time.
I think they would
like to be objective,
but they are driven particularly
in a market were they're
fighting each other for
market share by profit
and therefore they
may fund research,
but they're much likely like
the pharmaceutical industry,
you often find that
they are hiring
people who've already spoken
on their side of the argument.
Scientists aren't pop stars.
They don't have a lot of money.
They have houses to finance.
They have families
to look after.
Who can blame them for
recognizing that if they find
the wrong results, they're
not going to get another job,
from that source at any rate.
There are psychological
pressures even in the absence
of actual pressures,
which may or may not
be present in individual
circumstances.
There are clearly
psychological pressures
to conform and to
please the organization
providing your funding.
INTERVIEWER: You feel obliged.
You feel obliged.
There are some really
solid statistics
showing that where
there is an issue over
electromagnetic field effects.
The study is funded
by the utilities
or by the power industry
or the radio industry
or by the mobile phone
industry are funded by them,
the studies tend to be
significantly negative,
whereas the studies
funded independently
within universities, and
so on tend not to be so.
It's a challenging area
in which to research.
It's not easy to do
studies of that sort.
Because of the constraints
of doing research
in human subjects,
you're not going to have
perfect research studies.
There are always going
to be limitations.
Is this a real condition?
Yes.
Absolutely, it is.
At present, the World Health
Organization statements
regarding this are
that it is real
and symptoms can be
severe and disabling.
The figures for electromagnetic
hypersensitivity
are around 2% to 3%.
Those are people who've had
their life extremely affected
by this condition.
But as I've previously
mentioned, on a cellular level
100% of people are reacting.
That means that the health care
consequences of not taking this
seriously, not recognizing
it are potentially huge
and the numbers of
people that have mild
to moderate
electrical sensitivity
are probably far higher
than we estimate.
MALE SPEAKER: So where
does all that leave us?
It leaves us with a tape
recording of an experiment
to link up between
a standard telephone
and a unique mobile handset.
A dialing tone.
And that's quite an
achievement because it's
one thing to transmit
a conversation,
it's another to transmit
accurate digital information.
Now, an extension
at the Research
Institute in Chelmsford, which
has perfected this technique.
On the other end of this
should be Liz Charnock.
NARRATOR: With the advent of
the mobile phone in the 1980's
came the need to build a network
of antennas to support them.
Since then the telecom
companies have erected over
five million mobile phone
masts around the world,
but incredibly, prior to
filling the air with microwave
frequencies, they didn't conduct
a single piece of research
to ensure there wouldn't
be any long-term health
effects from such exposure.
The grid was built without
first making sure it was safe.
Thank you for your help.
LIZ CHARNOCK: Hello.
So it's pretty ugly, isn't it?
Yeah, it's constant as well.
One thing you'll notice
is it doesn't stop.
It's 24/7.
This is what's coming
out of the mast.
If you can see the mast,
you're being exposed to it.
Frankly, even if
you can't, you're
being exposed to it if
you're this distance
away because it will pass
through concrete walls
and things.
It will dampen it a
bit, but not very much.
If you're within 200, 300
meters of the mast up there,
this is what you're going
to be exposed to 24/7.
When you can hear it,
it changes everything.
-It does.
-Imagine if you could see it.
It would be the equivalent
of seeing a daily smog.
NARRATOR: With the constant
smog of man-made frequencies
surrounding our daily lives and
no testing as to its safety,
is there any wonder people's
bodies have started react?
Well, it almost
10 years ago when
I was in my 30s, no history
of breast cancer in my family
and living a really
healthy lifestyle,
I'd been living
next to a phone mast
for many years, over
seven years by then.
INTERVIEWER: How
far was that from--
It was a 100 meters
from the house.
INTERVIEWER: All right.
So pretty close.
Yeah.
And for years I've been having
symptoms, which I hadn't
related to the phone mast
because I didn't know anything
about the condition of
electrosensitivity then
and I've been having vertigo,
sleep problems, headaches,
sharp pains in my head.
And I'd often visit the
doctor only to be told it
was either stress or a virus.
And then just out
of the blue, I was
diagnosed with breast
cancer and it was
the biggest shock of my life.
And at first I thought,
well, it's bad luck.
It's just unlucky
it's me and started
to go through my
treatment and it was then
I started bumping into
neighbors in the hospital.
And I only lived
in a small village
and started to bump
into other young ladies
as well who were neighbors.
INTERVIEWER: Young?
How old?
Well, I was the
youngest in my 30s,
but the others were in
the 40s or early 50s.
INTERVIEWER: That's very young.
And that was five
of us all diagnosed
at once within six months of
each other with breast cancer.
NARRATOR: There were only
18 houses in the village
surrounding the phone
mast, so Eileen decided
to conduct a survey to see
if anybody else had suddenly
started suffering ill health.
What came back
really frightened us.
Lots of people were reporting
the same symptoms that I'd
been suffering for years.
INTERVIEWER: The vertigo?
-Yeah.
The headaches.
The vertigo.
But there was other young women
in the village who were having
fertility problems and
precancerous cervical cells,
other young ladies
who tied breast
cancer, benign lumps, or
the conditions of cancer
as well in the area.
One of our neighbors
who was only 51
had developed motor
neuron disease
and he unfortunately died.
And so we unearthed an
horrendous can of worms.
We've done a count of
77 people in the houses.
And out of 77 houses,
how many people?
were suffering
biological effects?
The estimates was around 70%.
70% of people?
--who had effects over the
years with biological effects,
sleep problems, skin rashes,
benign lumps, or cancer.
Yeah, it had a big impact
on people in the village.
I think this is a
global, massive problem.
We found since then that
we were not the only cancer
cluster around a phone mast.
There are many cancer
clusters around phone masts
and we've worked with a local
scientist where we looked
at the phone masts that have
been in areas for a long time
and conducted all
the surveys and found
other cancer clusters as well.
NARRATOR: With so many phones
and masts and a mobile phone
industry worth
trillions, you will
hope that by now a strict
governing body would have been
installed, a iron-fisted
regulator who ensures
the telecoms industry airs
on the side of caution,
someone to set strict
levels which protect
the public, someone to
ensure that what we're being
exposed to is absolutely safe.
Unfortunately, we
don't have any of that.
What we do have is ICNIRP.
Well, ICNIRP was
set up in Europe
about 20 odd years ago to look
into non-ionizing radiation.
It stands for International
Committee of Non-ionizing
Radiation Protection
and their job
is to look at all the
literature that comes out
and basically summarize
it, say this is what
the science definitely says.
You can't get
elected to it, you
get invited to join it if you're
one of the preferred people.
So it's always on
the side of industry
because that's really
where its roots are.
So what we've got is, we've
got a guidance standard which
they've set, which has
been adopted by most
of the countries in Europe
and it's been something
that the European Commission
themselves recommend, including
their expert [INAUDIBLE], but
those guidelines are based
on evidence that we know
has a cause and effect
for radio frequency radiation.
So the only setting that exists
at the moment, the energy
that's around the same
frequency of mobile phone,
mast mobile phones,
deck cordless phones,
was communication devices
that we used on a daily basis
is the one that we know
works from microwave ovens.
So if you can
generate enough energy
and localize it in a small
enough area, you heat things,
you heat tissue, you
heat anything that
has some level of water in it.
None of the current
rules have anything
to do with chronic
health effects or cancer,
none of them, not one of them.
They've all set for heating
effects and acute effects,
like trickling of the skin
or your eyebrows going out
or something like that.
None of them are for
long-term health effects.
So you're saying that it's
below 40 that means nothing.
-Its meaningless.
-It's meaningless.
It's meaningless.
It is not intended to protect
from long-term health effects.
ICNIRP is just irrelevant.
It's irrelevant.
For example, if you want to
make sure that nobody exceeds
the speed limit
past a school, set
1,000 miles an hour,
then everyone will
obey the speed limit.
No one will exceed it.
Everyone can go sailing
past your school
at 999 miles an hour and the
limit will be complied with.
The advisory body
effectively are not
set up to look at the
evidence with regards
to safeguarding
the general public.
INTERVIEWER: So
[INAUDIBLE] a century
there to establish 100% fact and
anything that's not 100% fact
is not their concern.
That's right they'll
go talk about it,
they'll summarize
what there is, what
there isn't, and what's left to
find out, and then that's it.
They'll leave it.
There no recommendations,
nothing because they
just don't see it as their job.
So what if I try
and make a call?
Let me try and make a call.
If you try and
make a phone call,
then it would be almost
constant because it
starts a proper sort of
two-wave, high bandwidth
transmission.
-OK.
Let's do that.
-Oh, wow.
So as soon as it picks up--
This is it trying to-- and this
is when someone's [INAUDIBLE].
This is now what
the phone is doing.
And that's waves going from
my phone to the bay station
and then being
transmitted from there.
Yeah.
And that's it's picked up.
That's horrible.
And that's basically what
your phone is transmitting
into your head all the time
you've got an operation
and using the phone.
NARRATOR: It's hard to
imagine a piece of technology
which has accelerated
into our lives
quite like the mobile phone.
25 years ago, it was seen as
little more than a gimmick.
Today four billion of us
own one and the average age
of a child when they
receive their first phone
is just eight years old.
The way a mobile phone
works is by sending
and receiving
microwave frequencies
to and from the bay station.
So having a phone pressed
against your head inevitably
means your brain is being
exposed to those waves.
Does the brain react
to this exposure?
A recent American study
shows it absolutely does.
The work was carried
out by Dr. Nora Volkow.
Dr. Volkow and her team
studied 47 healthy people
for an entire year.
Participants had a cell phone
placed on their left and right
ears, one was
activated but muted,
the other was turned off.
Dr. Volkow used brain
imaging equipment
to study how much
glucose the brain
would use during exposure.
So it's a very sensitive
marker to indicate if there are
changes in brain
activity that may
be driven by a given
stimulus, which in this case
was the cell phone.
NARRATOR: When the
brain is stimulated,
it consumes glucose in the
same way a car consumes fuel.
50-minutes exposure
to a cell phone
was associated with increases
in glucose consumption
by the brain, which
indicates that the brain
was being activated by
the radio frequencies
from the cell phone.
This right area
of the brain that
was very close to the
antenna show the largest
increases in
metabolism as compare
when the telephones were off.
Even though the radio
frequencies that are emitted
from current cell phone
technologies are very weak,
they are able to activate the
human brain, to have an effect.
NARRATOR: By using
a muted cell phone,
Dr. Volkow's experiment showed
that the human brain has
a metabolic reaction to
the presence of microwaves
from a mobile phone, a
metabolic reaction at levels
well below the legal limit,
something many people
claimed was impossible.
And the reaction
recorded by the doctor
is secondary to an even
greater concern, the way
that those microwaves are
actually absorbed by the brain.
This has become known as SAR.
SAR is, well, first of all, it
stands for specific absorption
rate and that's the measure of
how much RF energy in this case
radio waves is absorbed
into the human body
over a certain period of
time within a certain volume.
So it's a measure of
the heating effect
that a radio transmitter
would have on your body,
on the human body.
NARRATOR: The SAR for
every mobile phone
is measured in this way,
using an artificial head
called a SAM phantom.
This is filled with
a glucose mixture
which represents the brain.
The probe measures the
amount of microwave radiation
that penetrates the
SAM phantom skull
and calculates a
SAR rating based
on how much energy is absorbed.
From the European Union, the
limit is 2 watts per kilogram,
over 10 gram average of tissue.
For America, it's 1.6
watts per kilogram,
over a 1 gram average of tissue.
So the limit for the USA is more
stringent than for the European
Union, but other
countries around the world
such as Australia, New Zealand,
use the European limit.
NARRATOR: Some of the most
popular phones on the market
emit so much microwave
radiation that the SAR rating is
right on the edge of the limit.
Every millimeter of skull
helps protect the brain
against the phone's
microwave radiation
and therefore lowers
the phone's SAR rating.
Children get their first
phone at the average age
of eight years old.
An eight-year-old skull is
considerably thinner than that
of an adult. So you would
hope that phones are tested
against the skull which
represents the thickness
of that of a child.
The SAM head is an average
shaped and sized human skull.
The average of 10,000 people
has been taken in terms
of their head
measurements and this SAM
phantom head has
been created, which
is an average human skull.
NARRATOR: Obviously the
head of an average human
being is considerably
larger than that
of an eight-year-old child.
But when we investigated
the company that
makes the SAM phantom
head, we discovered
that the news is even worse.
The SAM phantom isn't just
the average of 10,000 people,
it's the average of
10,000 US Army personnel.
And the US Army
personnel most certainly
have a larger,
bigger, thicker head
than the average eight-year-old.
It's pretty reasonable to assume
that if most mobile phones were
tested against the skull
of an eight-year-old,
they would fail.
INTERVIEWER: Who is it
that sets the standards?
A group of people from a
committee called ICNIRP.
The people who do the
work on mobile phones
are by and large engineers.
They have no idea what is going
on inside the living cell,
but they are
pontificating on this.
They make the assumption that
the only thing that can affect
the well being of
a living organism
is if it is powerful
enough to heat the tissue.
Well, that's like saying we know
if we boil an egg it goes hard.
What they don't know is that
if they don't boil the egg,
it turns into a chicken
and haven't the slightest
idea how that
happens, but the yet
they pontificate as if they do.
NARRATOR: In 2011, the
World Health Organization
changed the danger rating of
mobile phones re-classing it
as possibly carcinogenic to
humans based on an increased
risk of contracting angioma, the
type of brain tumor associated
with using a mobile phone.
What was the catalyst for
this abrupt change in status?
There have been countless
studies conducted
into the possible health
effects of mobile phones,
some showing an effect,
some showing no effect.
But the most conclusive
came from Lennart Hardell.
He has overseen the largest
and most comprehensive piece
of research ever
conducted combining
his own work with that of
others from around the world.
From the early 1990s, they have
investigated the phone habits
of more than 2,000 people
from around the world, people
with tumors such as astrocytoma
and acoustic neuroma.
The brain tumors associated
most with mobile phone
use due to their
proximity to the air.
Their findings are shocking.
They concluded that mobile
phone use does increase
the risk of a brain
tumor and they also
discovered why earlier
research showed no effect.
I think there's more
evidence that it's
carcinogenic than just
possibly carcinogenic,
but I can understand it
in a way because most
of the cancers which will
arrive haven't arrived yet.
People haven't been
using cell phones
for long enough for the true
effect to become apparent.
NARRATOR: As is the case
with other carcinogens,
it takes at least 10 years
before you start to see
an effect from the exposure.
Because the mobile phone
explosion didn't really
take hold until the
late 1990s, it's
not surprising we
are just starting
to see the effects right now.
So what are the
telecoms industry
doing to protect its users
from contracting a brain tumor?
A flick to the far reaches
of their safety manuals
suggests that they
are more concerned
about protecting themselves.
At the back of almost
every single phone
user guide are instructions
on how far to keep your phone
from your body, instructions
which, in the most part,
are wholly unworkable.
And what happens when the
telecoms industry funds
research into the harm
that they are causing
and that research concludes that
there is an effect that the use
of a mobile phone
does play a role
in the development of
cancer, they tend to keep
that research to themselves.
We just don't know what
we're storing up with the MF
because the effects
are largely long term
and we have as you say
this ubiquitous exposure
and ubiquitous reliance
on these exposures.
We just don't fully understand
yet what we're doing.
NARRATOR: Although the
epidemiology clearly
shows that using a
mobile phone increases
the risk of contracting a brain
tumor, what people at ICNIRP
need to see is a definitive
cause and effect, how it
happens, what's
the mechanism, how
exactly is the cancer caused.
It may seem obvious that a
being so tuned in to the Earth's
frequencies and so sensitive
to her magnetic field
would naturally have a reaction
to man-made microwaves.
But for years, the
telecoms industry
have defended their actions
by asking the same question.
As it turns out, they've been
asking the wrong question.
The answer is melatonin.
You know melatonin is a
hormone and believe it or not,
it's made in the brain.
It's made in the pineal
gland of the brain
and it's got a very
powerful antioxidant
status compared with vitamins.
For example, melatonin is five
times as powerful as vitamin C
and twice as powerful as vitamin
E and it secretes only at night
and it's at night
that we need it
because that's
when we go to sleep
and when our brain repairs
the cells of our body.
And that's when melatonin
comes out to do its work.
NARRATOR: Each day our body
loses about half a billion
cells and at night, that's
when our body replaces
those cells through
a process called cell
mitosis, the dividing of cells.
What it's doing
is, it's mopping up
what are called free radicals.
These free radicals are really
the spare electrons left over
from the process of making the
energy which we need to repair
ourselves in the first place.
NARRATOR: Each night
as our body repairs
itself, millions of
free radical cells
are created as a
byproduct of cell mitosis.
These free radical cells
attack healthy cells.
It is universally agreed
that the free radical cell
is the main causal
factor in most cancer.
Our body's main defense
against these free radicals
is its most powerful
antioxidant, melatonin.
It passes into the
blood stream and its job
is to act as a
natural antioxidant,
a natural anti cancer agent.
Melatonin is a very, very
powerful anti-cancer agent.
What it does is
it acts as what's
called an oncostatic
agent, that is
it protects you against cancer.
It controls the
sleep-wake cycle so
that you get a good
night's sleep when
you've got proper melatonin.
It's an anti-aging molecule.
In other words, by mopping
up those free radicals,
it leaves your skin and
complexion looking younger.
We have in our lab
12,000 studies,
which we've collected
over the years
and that is more
studies than have ever
been published on
paracetamol, which is the most
common headache reliever.
There is more scientific
interest in melatonin
than there is in paracetamol.
INTERVIEWER: What are the
consequences of having
a reduced amount of melatonin?
-Yeah.
Well, if you have a reduced
amount of melatonin, what
happens then is that your
immune system starts to be
less competent, for a start.
You tend to get
sleep disturbance.
You can get off to
sleep or if you do,
you wake up and can't
get back to sleep.
You can have heart
complications because melatonin
protects your heart as well.
And you're much more
prone to disease
because your immune system is
not functioning at its best.
So these are some of the
things that happen when you
have a lowered melatonin level.
And for example, the average
woman with breast cancer
has only got 1/10
of the melatonin
of a normal woman of her age.
And for people with
prostate cancer,
they've got less than
half the melatonin
that they should have.
Autistic children have less
than half melatonin levels
that they should enjoy.
Reduced melatonin in
night shift workers--
because they're working at
night and exposed to light;
they don't produce
nocturnal melatonin--
is known to produce a 50%
increase in breast cancer risk.
And the International Agency
for Research on Cancer, IARC,
has actually classed night
shift work as a class
to a probable carcinogen because
of its melatonin reduction.
There are lots of studies now
showing that people on night
shifts or people who are blind
have different cancer rates
than the average population
and most of those studies
support the view
that the absence
or the lowered melatonin has
an adverse effect on health.
NARRATOR: Because the body
only repairs itself at night,
melatonin is only produced
when the pineal gland senses
that no light is present.
What happens is that the
pineal gland is light sensitive.
It's sitting right
where your brain
receives signals from
your eyes, that crossover
point in the middle.
It's called the suprachiasmatic
nuclei and that the connections
from there goes directly
to the pineal gland
to tell it whether there's
any light around or not.
If there is light
around, then there's
also interference
with the signals
the brain wants to send to our
cells in order to repair them.
So it says there is no point in
the brain sending these signals
out to our cells to
tell them to repair
because there's so
much interference
that they won't hear it.
So the brain waits
until it's dark.
INTERVIEWER: What
kind of research
is shown that there is
an effect on melatonin
production from electric fields,
magnetic fields, radio waves?
Right.
Well, the Battelle
Institute in America
has done a lot of work on this
way back from the late 1970s,
in fact.
And their scientists there,
Barry Wilson and Dick Stevens
and people like that,
started thinking
that because we know that
if you turn the light on,
then the brain stops making
melatonin, they thought,
well, maybe our brains
can't distinguish
between electric fields that
we make ourselves artificially
and the natural light
that we all know this
happens during the daytime
because we just don't
make melatonin in the daytime.
Very good biological reasons.
So they thought, well, maybe
these electric fields are
suppressing the
synthesis of melatonin
and that that, in turn, is
leading to cancer, breast
cancer particularly, in
women because they don't
have the immunological
protection
that they would otherwise have.
INTERVIEWER: So the brain
interprets radio waves
as being light waves.
-Yeah.
We don't know the difference.
NARRATOR: The hypothesis
that the pineal gland cannot
distinguish between
light frequencies
and man-made frequencies
is certainly backed
up by a wealth of research.
INTERVIEWER: Do you think
it's pretty conclusive
that electric fields,
magnetic fields, radio waves
effect the production
of melatonin?
This research, which shows that
kestrel melatonin levels fall
with exposure, that white
storks nesting on buildings
near to radio masts have lowered
progeny compared with the stork
nests a long way away from
radio masts, studies on ants,
studies on bees, studies
on birds of various kinds,
studies on marine mammals all
point in the same direction.
But then there are studies
in the laboratory of cells
in the pineal gland,
which actually synthesizes
the melatonin and looking at
the effects of magnetic fields
on those cells.
And virtually every stage in
the synthesis of melatonin
it's been shown
that magnetic fields
disturbs the actual
production of melatonin.
So you see the evidence is
in all aspects of the pathway
of melatonin production, that
the inhibition of melatonin
production by our magnetic
fields, the research
covers really every
aspect of that pathway.
INTERVIEWER: Would you
say that it's conclusive?
Yes.
I would say it is
almost conclusive.
NARRATOR: The genius
of our body means
it is able to counter the
production of free radicals
with the production
of melatonin.
We have created in
ourselves a precise balance,
a perfect system of defense.
It has taken our body
millions of years
to perfect this
technique, a technique
created based on
the surroundings
we have evolved in.
But over the last few decades,
our surroundings have changed
and changed exponentially.
To the naked eye, the world
appears to be the same,
but at the cellular
level, it is the biggest
change in environment
life has ever encountered.
It stands to reason that such
a gargantuan change would
inevitably upset such
a delicate balance
and the consequences
of our bodies
not producing the right
amount of melatonin
could be disastrous.
Scientists around the world
now believe that free radicals
could be the causal factor in
every known disease, not just
cancer.
In the beginning of the
1900s, childhood leukemia
was a medical rarity.
We've seen nothing but an
increase in childhood leukemia
ever since that point.
It's going up every
year by about 2%
and that applies to
many other disorders
as well, autism,
brain tumors, cancer.
Cancer rates in the
1910s were probably
half of what they are today and
many other diseases are being
connected by scientific
studies with exposure
to electromagnetic fields
and radiations, not
just power lines,
but also to radio
fields and microwave fields.
Because in the last
50 years, really,
we've immersed
ourselves in an ocean
of electromagnetic radiation.
It's all around us now,
invisible, we can't see it,
but we know it's there.
Every time you lift
up your mobile phone,
you know it's there.
It's very, very hard to
turn the clock back, if not
impossible to turn
the clock back,
but we need to be aware
of those health effects
so that we have the choice
of taking precaution
against the exposures.
If that's what we wish to do,
that's what we need to do.
What worries me,
things that are actually
happening now that we haven't
paid enough attention to,
perhaps.
And one of the things
that's happening
is autism or given
its proper name,
autistic spectrum disorders.
INTERVIEWER: I think we're
getting to a point in science
where we almost don't
have a control group to be
able to test things like this
because almost everybody has
a mobile phone, almost
everybody has Wi-Fi,
almost everybody is exposed
to electromagnetic fields.
Yes.
We are reaching a situation
where so many people are
exposed to
electromagnetic fields
from mobile phones on Wi-Fi
that we no longer have a control
population to look at the
difference between the health
for people who are
exposed versus the health
of people who are not exposed.
If I can take an analogy,
we did find out that smoking
caused lung cancer.
That was because some
people did not smoke
and they were a control group.
If everyone had
smoked, we may never
have found that smoking caused
lung cancer and everyone would
have been dying of lung cancer
and it would have been regarded
as a sort of natural
disease without ever
having a link with smoking.
What's happening with
mobile phone exposure
is we are losing this population
of people who are not exposed.
Even the few people who
don't own a mobile phone
are surrounded by the
radiation from the mobile phone
when they go
shopping, when they go
on a train, wherever they go.
It's not just the canary
down the mine like myself.
Eventually, if you
simply increase
the electromagnetic fields in
the atmosphere, which we're
doing and we've now
got a million times
more electromagnetic fields,
microwaves in the environment
then we had 30 years
ago, eventually
it will start to affect you.
It's very, very hard to say
where we might be in 15 years'
time, but I would very much hope
within a few years time we do
recognize just how much these
ill health effects are actually
costing society and
then we might wake up
and look at the causes
and realize we have to do
something about the causes.
NARRATOR: We are a brilliant
yet complex organism.
The way that our body functions
isn't by chance, nor is it
something which has
happened overnight.
Like every other
creature on this planet,
we have adapted into the
environment we exist in,
an environment which since
the beginning of time
has had a delicate balance
of fields and resonances.
These phenomena don't
just surround us,
they make us what we are.
The cells of our body
communicate with each other
using light frequencies.
Our DNA uses
electromagnetic frequencies
to reproduce itself.
At the core of
everything are protons
and electrons,
positive and negative,
making all life magnetic.
We are as all life is equipped
with cryptochrome cells,
which allows us to
sense those fields
in ways we barely understand.
We are beings of frequency,
electricity, light,
and magnetism and to
become this way has taken
millions of years, a
process which started
with the very first cell.
Although we have embraced
the wireless technology
and accepted it into our
everyday lives, at a cellular
level, our bodies haven't.
The frequencies
that now surround us
are as alien to our cells
as they would be to our eyes
if only we could see them.
Our children are being born
into a world that their bodies
simply cannot understand.
Where would all this lead?
As this film is being made,
4G technology is being
rolled out around the world.
To accommodate this, the ceiling
levels are being increased.
Wi-Fi is in almost every single
home, school, and business
surrounding us constantly.
Deck phone technology
is the norm in almost
every single household.
At a time when the
industries responsible should
be displaying caution, they are
displaying a reckless disregard
for our long-term health.
Money talks and
they are about as
likely to develop a conscience
as the tobacco industries did.
If there's going to
be a change, it's
not going to come from them.
It's going to have
to come from us.
We just need to open our
eyes and see the problem.
INTERVIEWER: With
the MTA [INAUDIBLE],
do you think fund research
into the radio waves effecting
melatonin, given that this is
the mechanism that people seem
to point to, that
mobile phones effect
the production of melatonin.
Melatonin is an antioxidant,
a free radical vacuum
cleaner, if you like.
When the issue called
for research proposals
as we're doing at the moment,
while we highlight areas that
are of particular interest,
we invite applications,
proposals across the spectrum.
But it would have
to be prioritized
alongside the other
applications that we get.
We only have a
limited pot of money,
but we don't rule out funding
research on melatonin.
It's not one of the areas
that we've identified
as a priority at the moment.